Continuous performance unit testing (#15)
gunnarmorling/morling.dev: content/blog/towards-continuous-performance-regression-testing.asciidoc

---
title: "Towards Continuous Performance Regression Testing"
date: 2020-12-16T17:45:00+01:00
draft: false
---
:source-highlighter: rouge
:rouge-style: base16.dark
:icons: font
:imagesdir: /images
ifdef::env-github[]
:imagesdir: ../../static/images
endif::[]

Functional unit and integration tests are a standard tool of any software development organization,
helping not only to ensure correctness of newly implemented code,

> but also to identify regressions -- bugs to existing functionality introduced by a code change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but also to identify regressions -- bugs in existing functionality introduced by a code change.
```

The situation looks different though when it comes to regressions related to non-functional requirements, in particular performance-related ones:
How to detect increased response times in a web application?

> How to identify decreased throughput?

Reviewer: While I understand what you mean, I'd say that these specific examples are a bit off since they are very much metrics which I would NOT test using your new tool?

There's a need for testing at both levels:
 - very micro, such as "This sort operation here can be performed in less than Z memory allocated even for an N sized array"
 - system wide impact, such as system design and integration is such that overall throughput (on certain machine) is within X,Y with some margins.

I'd use a tool like JfrUnit for the first cathefory only, it seems a slippery slope to try abusing it for beyond this and that's probably a claim I'd be umcofortable with :)

Author: > There's a need for testing at both levels

Agreed. I think JfrUnit's testing approach can play a role for both, though. For the second, it wouldn't help you answering that question "overall throughput is within X,Y with some margins" directly, but it would help you to identify potential regressions, going against that goal. It should be more clear in the discussion towards the end, perhaps I need to reword here a bit, too.

These aspects are typically hard to test in an automated and reliable way in the development workflow,

> as they are dependent on the underlying hardware and the workload of an application.

Reviewer: But best to split what you're going to measure here in cathegories. Since JfrUnit is about "indirect" metrics, you can't really verify that not having a certain `Sleep(1000)` or not having a certain GC event will necessarily give you the throughput you're after.

> For instance assertions on the duration of specific requests of a web application cannot be run in a meaningful way on a developer laptop which differs from the actual production hardware.

Reviewer: Maybe qualify this? People who do care a bit more about performance might not be doing their homework on a laptop, and might be running Linux on their daily driver for this very reason of actually emulating a production environment closely.

Sure ideally one wants to test on the same "production hardware" where ultimately the code is going to run, but when working on flexible libraries which are going to be deployed in a variety of systems, that's as good as it can get.

Author: Reworded slightly.

> When run in a virtualized or containerized CI environment, such tests are prone to failures due to concurrent load of other applications and jobs.

Reviewer: I'm assuming you are suggesting the idea of running performance tests on virtualized / shared resources here, for example we have some tests which send an alert if some metric gets beyond some % trheshold of difference with previous averages. Might want to clarify that?

In which case I'd say s/failures/ severe measurement distortions / ?

There's also other challenges: valid bugfixes and good improvements which tend to slowly get you closer to thethreshold of failure will regularly erode safety margins, eventually triggering CI failures for totally innocent changes; for example I've seen a typo in a README trigger a performance failure - because such metrics need constant "gardening" to be useful.

Author: > I'd say s/failures/ severe measurement distortions / ?

+1 I like that.

> There's also other challenges [...]

Yes, great point. Added this to the section at the end about possible future additions. Also discussing with John O'Hara about this who has similar ideas.

> This post introduces https://github.com/gunnarmorling/jfrunit[JfrUnit], which offers a fresh angle to this topic by supporting assertions not on metrics like latency/throughput themselves, but on _indirect metrics_ which may impact those.

Reviewer: +100 awesome

But could use an example of "indirect metrics" and why they matter?

Author: It's clarified in the next sentence. Also reworded it a bit to make the point stronger.

Based on https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/328[JDK Flight Recorder] events, JfrUnit allows you define and execute assertions e.g. against expected memory allocation, database I/O, or number of executed SQL statements, for a given workload.

> Starting off from a defined base line, future failures of such assertions are indicators for potential performance regressions in an application, as a code change may have introduced higher GC pressure,

Reviewer: I don't think there's such a thing as "GC pressure". you probably mean excessive allocations?

What I'd see your tool most useful for is to introduce regression tests for specific optimisations which have already been identified in the past as problematic under certain workloads. For example, as you well know, there's some code areas of Hibernate ORM which have been carefully tuned for being very lean on allocations, while in 90% of the codebase this doesn't matter (or its importance has not been identified yet).

When one implements such an optimisation, it requires a specialized benchmark to verify that the fix has been performed, but we don't have the means to protect the feature against future regressions.

In such a scenario I'd think JfrUnit would be "gold", as one has a deep understanding of the specific metrics which matter in that case, and can encode the goal as "indirect metrics" to be tested more easily in the future.

Of course that doesn't guarantee any figure to be delivered on the same benchmark again, but it's much better than not doing anything at all.

Author: Yes, that's exactly the use case I have in mind. I think you would benefit a lot from JfrUnit in Hibernate by using it to set up a performance regression test suite. But beyond that, I think it also can be interesting for application developers, which is what I'm focusing a bit more in this post (solely due to the fact that that this is a much larger audience).

Author: > I don't think there's such a thing as "GC pressure". you probably mean excessive allocations?

The latter is leading to the former :) Seeing quite a few usages of that term, including JDK docs, so I think it's legit.

> the retrieval of unneccessary data from the database, or SQL problems commonly induced by ORM tools, like N+1 SELECT statements.

Reviewer: well N+1 is meh.. it's certainly good to test against it (and maybe we should see to make this easier with some helper and a blog) but that could be done in much simpler / traditional ways.

I feel it's a bit distracting from the real potential of the Jfr metrics.

Author: Happy to discuss another example around Hibernate/SQL, if you have one? N+1 was the first thing that came to my mind. It's going to be discussed in a follow-up post (in January), so you got some time to think about it ;)

based on the examples of asserting expected memory allocation and database I/O
* The second part will discuss the assertion of the SQL statements executed by an application,
based on the instrumentation of JDBC APIs using https://wiki.openjdk.java.net/display/jmc/The+JMC+Agent[JMC Agent]

== Getting Started With JfrUnit

JfrUnit is an extension for JUnit 5, which integrates Flight Recorder into unit tests;
it makes it straight forward to initiate a JFR recording for a given set of event types,
execute some test routine, and then assert the JFR events which should have been produced.

Here is a basic example of a JfrUnit test:

[source,java]
----
@JfrEventTest // <1>
public class JfrUnitTest {

  public JfrEvents jfrEvents = new JfrEvents();

  @Test
  @EnableEvent("jdk.GarbageCollection") // <2>
  @EnableEvent("jdk.ThreadSleep")
  public void shouldHaveGcAndSleepEvents() throws Exception {
    System.gc();
    Thread.sleep(1000);

    jfrEvents.awaitEvents(); // <3>

    ExpectedEvent = event("jdk.GarbageCollection"); // <4>
    assertThat(jfrEvents).contains(event); 
    
    ExpectedEvent = event("jdk.GarbageCollection") // <4>
        .with("cause", "System.gc()"));

>     assertThat(jfrEvents).contains(event); 

Reviewer: pretty cool. So the `with("cause"` created a restriction the matcher ? I mean, I take it that this wouldn't fail if there was a naturally occuring GC event accidentally being recorded as well?

Author: Yes, exactly. `with()` sets up the given event attribute to be matched against. If there'd be another GC with another cause, this wouldn't cause this assertion to fail. We might think about adding `containsNot()` though, this could be useful actually. Captured in https://github.com/gunnarmorling/jfrunit/issues/8.

    ExpectedEvent = event("jdk.ThreadSleep").
        with("time", Duration.ofSeconds(1)));

>     assertThat(jfrEvents).contains(event); 

Reviewer: is this precise enough to reliably work? I guess you should expand a little on how the event attributes are matched.

Author: Added an explantory sentence.

    assertThat(jfrEvents.ofType("jdk.GarbageCollection")).hasSize(1); // <5>
  }
}
----
<1> `@JfrEventTest` marks this as a JfrUnit test, activating its extension
<2> All JFR event types to be recorded must be enabled via `@EnableEvent`

> <3> After running the test logic, `awaitEvents()` must be invoked as a synchronization barrier,

Reviewer: so, design question.. why not expressing all expectations declaratively rather than have the user deal with the need for barriers?

Author: Yes, I was (am) considering that, as it makes the barrier issue go away, as you say. But declarative makes for much less flexibility in terms of expressing those expected values, you'd have to come up with a solution for summing up, aggregations, custom events etc. You'll land in "programming in annotations" land pretty quickly. So I'm leaning towards the imperative approach.

Reviewer: ah yes I understand it better after having seen the second example.

since it can make a huge difference for a library such as Hibernate ORM whether a method invoked many times on a hot code path allocates a few bytes more or less memory.
Allocating less memory means less work for the garbage collector,
which in turn means those precious CPU cores of your machine can spend more cycles processing your actual business logic.

But also for an actual application itself it can be beneficial to keep an eye on -- and systematically track -- object allocations,
as regressions there lead to increased GC pressure,
and in turn eventually to higher latencies and reduced throughput.

The key for tracking object allocations with JFR are the `jdk.ObjectAllocationInNewTLAB` and `jdk.ObjectAllocationOutsideTLAB` events,
which are emitted when

* an object allocation triggered the creation of a new thread-local allocation buffer (TLAB) 
* an object got allocated outside of the threads TLAB

[NOTE]
.Thread-local allocation buffers (TLAB)
====
When creating new object instances on the heap,
this primarily happens via _thread-local allocation buffers_.
A TLAB is a pre-allocated memory block that's exclusively used by a single thread.

> Creating new objects within a TLAB can happen without costly synchronization with other threads.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this space is exclusively owned by the thread, new objects within a TLAB can happen without costly synchronization with other threads.
```

Author: Nice.

Once a thread's current TLAB capacity is about to be exceeded by a new object allocation,

> a new TLAB will be allocated for that thread.

Reviewer: hum I don't remember the limit defaults, but I think it's a bit misleading to let people think it will just keep growing, as the whole point of our most important optimisations is to not exceed the limit.

Author: I'm not quite following on that one; what is the "it" in "it will just keep growing"? The TLAB doesn't grow, it will be used up by allocations, and when the next allocation doesn't fit into it, the thread will get a new TLAB for the next set of allocations. You won't avoid that, unless you do zero allocations or allocate in your own self-managed `byte[]`.

> In addition, large objects can also be directly allocated, outside of the TLAB.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, large objects will likely need to be directly allocated outside of the more efficient TLAB space.
```

To learn more about TLAB allocation, refer to  https://shipilev.net/jvm/anatomy-quarks/4-tlab-allocation/[part #4] of Aleksey Shipilёv's "JVM Anatomy Quark" blog series.
====

> Note these events don't allow for tracking of each individual object allocation,

Reviewer: Are you sure? I do remember chasing TLAB allocation in more detail, but indeed this was in the older JFR and I never really understood why this metric was now. Maybe that was a mistake and it was removed later?

Reviewer: cc/ @stalep

Author: Yes, pretty sure. The "inside TLAB" event gives you the new TLAB size and the size of the object which caused this (hence the notion of sampling). The "outside TLAB" gives you the object size, perhaps that's what you have in mind?

Reviewer: ah yes, I simply misunderstood what you meant. _sampling_ actually is an option. I misread this as suggesting one couldn't get any clue about what was getting into TLAB.

@EnableEvent("jdk.ObjectAllocationOutsideTLAB")
public void retrieveTodoBaseline() throws Exception {
  Random r = new Random();

  HttpClient client = HttpClient.newBuilder()
      .build();

  for (int i = 1; i<= 100_000; i++) {
    executeRequest(r, client);

    if (i % 10_000 == 0) {
      jfrEvents.awaitEvents(); // <2>

      long sum = jfrEvents.filter(this::isObjectAllocationEvent)  // <3>
          .filter(this::isRelevantThread)
          .mapToLong(this::getAllocationSize)
          .sum();

      System.out.printf(
          Locale.ENGLISH, 
          "Requests executed: %s, memory allocated: (%,d bytes/request)%n",
          i, sum/10_000
      );

      jfrEvents.reset(); // <4>
    }
  }

  private void executeRequest(Random r, HttpClient client) throws Exception {
    int id = r.nextInt(20) + 1;

    HttpRequest request = HttpRequest.newBuilder()
        .uri(new URI("http://localhost:8081/todo/" + id))
        .headers("Content-Type", "application/json")
        .GET()
        .build();

    HttpResponse<String> response = client
        .send(request, HttpResponse.BodyHandlers.ofString());

    assertThat(response.statusCode()).isEqualTo(200);
  }

>   private boolean isObjectAllocationEvent(RecordedEvent re) { // <5>

Reviewer: it's a bit weird that the API seems completely different here? Rather than "selecting" by key now I get to stream all events?

Reviewer: (I understand you need it here to do the accumulation, but I'm suggesting it needs a warning that you'll be using a different approach)

Author: Good point. Clarified.

[source]
----
java.lang.AssertionError: 
Expecting:
 <388370L>
to be less than:
 <33000L> 
----

Ugh, it's suddenly allocating about ten times more memory per request than before!
What has happened?
To find the answer, we can take a look at the test's JFR recording, which JfrUnit persists under _target/jfrunit_:

[source,bash]
----
ls target/jfrunit

dev.morling.demos.quarkus.TodoResourcePerformanceTest-createTodo.jfr
dev.morling.demos.quarkus.TodoResourcePerformanceTest-retrieveTodo.jfr
----

Let's open the *.jfr file for the failing test in JDK Mission Control (JMC) in order to analyse all the recorded events
(note that the recording will always contain some JfrUnit-internal events which are needed for synchronizing the recording stream and the events exposed to the test).

When taking a look at the TLAB events of the application's executor thread,
the culprit is identified quickly;
a lot of the sampled TLAB allocations contain this stack trace:

image::continuous_perf_testing_tlab_in_jmc.png[TLAB allocations in JDK Mission Control]

Interesting, REST Assured loading a Jackson object mapper, what's going on there?
Here's the full stacktrace:

> image::continuous_perf_testing_tlab_stacktrace.png[Complete stacktrace of the TLAB allocation]

Reviewer: hugh, this really need to allow zooming in

Author: Yes, working on making the images click-zoomable.

          .get("/users/" + res.userId)
          .as(User.class);

  res.userName = user.name;

  return Response.ok()
      .entity(res)
      .build();
}
----

It seems a developer on the team has been taking the microservices mantra a bit too far, and has changed the code so it invokes another service in order to obtain some additional data associated to the user who created the retrieved todo.

While that's problematic in its own right due to the inherent coupling between the two services
(how should the todo service react if the user service isn't available?),
they made matters worse by using the https://rest-assured.io/[REST Assured API] as a REST client in a less than ideal way.
The APIs simplicity and elegance makes it a great choice for testing (and indeed that's its primary use case),
but this particular usage seems to be not such a good choice for production code.

At this point you should ask yourself whether the increased allocation per request actually is a problem for your application or not.
For that it helps to run some tests on actual request latency and throughput in a production like environment.
If there's no impact based on the workload you have to process,

> you might very well decide that additional allocations are well spent for your application's purposes.

Reviewer: :100:

Increasing the allocation per request by a factor of ten in the described way quite likely does not fall into this category, though.
At the very least, we should look into making the call against the User REST API more efficiently,
either by setting up REST Assured in a more suitable way, or by looking for an alternative REST client.
Of course the external API call just by itself adds to the request latency,
which is something we might want to avoid.

> It's also worth examining the applications garbage collection behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's also worth examining the application's garbage collection behavior.
```

https://twitter.com/ErikGahlin[Erik Gahlin] from the OpenJDK team logged https://bugs.openjdk.java.net/browse/JDK-8257906[JDK-8257906] for tracking and hopefully fixing this in JDK 16.
====

Now such drastic increase of allocation and thus potential impact on performance should hopefully be an exception rather than a regular situation.
But the example shows how continuous performance unit tests on impacting metrics like memory allocation via Flight Recorder and JfrUnit can help to identify performance issues in an automated and reliable way,
preventing such regression to sneak into production.
Being able to identify this kind of issue by running tests locally on a developer laptop or a CI server,
can be a huge time-saver and productivity boost.

== Identifying Increased I/O With the Database

Once you've started to look at performance tests through the lense of JfrUnit,
more and more possibilities pop up.
Asserting a maximum number of garbage collections? Not a problem.
Avoiding an unexpected amount of file system IO? The `jdk.FileRead` and `jdk.FileWrite` events are our friend.

> Examining and asserting the I/O done with the database? Easily doable.

Reviewer: I think I'd like also:

1. implement your own custom JFR events
2. use this to test your custom events

:-)

Author: Done.

[source]
----
java.lang.AssertionError: 
Expecting:
 <1117L>
to be less than:
 <250L>
----

That's definitely something to look into, as increased database I/O implies increased request latency.
So let's open the recording of the failed test in Flight Recorder and take a look at the socket read and write events.
Thanks to enabling stacktraces for the two JFR event types we can quite quickly identify the events asssociated to an invocation of the `GET /todo/{id}` API:

image::continuous_perf_testing_socket_regression.png[Socket read and write events after the performance regression]

At this point, some familiarity with the application in question will come in handy to identify suspicous events.
But even without that, we could compare previous recordings of successful test runs with the recording from the failing one to see where differences are.
In the case at hand, the `BlobInputStream` and Hibernate's `BlobTypeDescriptor` in the call stack seem pretty unexpected,
as our `User` entity didn't have any `BLOB` attribute before.

In reality, comparing with the latest version and a look into the git history of that class could confirm that there's a new attribute storing an image

> (surely not a best practice to do so ;):

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

I don't think it's that bad. Ideally, make it a lazy blob...

Author: Yes, mentioning that as an option later on.

[source,java]
----
@Entity
public class Todo extends PanacheEntity {

  public String title;
  public int priority;
  public boolean completed;

  @Lob // <1>
  public byte[] image;
}
----
<1> This looks suspicious!

We now would have to decide whether this image attribute should actually be loaded for this particular use case,
(if so, we'd have to adjust the test accordingly),
or whether it would for instance make more sense to mark this property as a lazily loaded one and only retrieve it when actually required.

Solely working with the raw socket read and write events can be a bit cumbersome, though.
Wouldn't it be nice if we also has the actual SQL statement which caused this I/O?
Glad you asked!

> Neither Hibernate nor the Postgres JDBC driver emit any JFR events at the moment,

Reviewer: add : "although the Hibernate team wants to look into this " .. ;)

but in part two of this blog post series, we'll discuss how to instrument an existing library to emit events like this,
using a Java agent, without modifying the library in question.

== Discussion and Summary

JDK Flight Recorder and JfrUnit open up a very interesting approach for identifying potential performance regressions in Java applications.
Instead of directly measuring an application's performance metrics,
most notably latency and throughput,
the idea is to measure and assert metrics that _impact_ the performance characteristics.
This allows you to implement stable and reliable automated performance unit tests,
whose outcome does not depend on the capabilities of the execution environment (e.g. number/size of CPUs),
or other influential factors like concurrently running programs.

> Regressions in such impacting metrics, e.g. the amount of allocated memory, or bytes read from an application's database,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Regressions in such impacting metrics, e.g. the amount of allocated memory, or bytes read from a database,
```

are indicators that the application's performance may have been degraded.
This approach offers some interesting advantages over performance tests on actual latency and throughput themselves:

* *Hardware independent:* You can identify potential regressions also when running tests on hardware which is different (i.e. less powerful) from the actual production hardware
* *Fast feedback cycle:* Being able to run performance regression tests on developer laptops, even in the IDE, allows for fast identification of potential regressions right during development, instead of having to wait for the results of less frequently executed test runs in a traditional performance test lab environment
* *Robustness:* Tests are robust and not prone to factors such as the load induced by parallel jobs of a CI server or a virtualized/containerized environment

> * *Pro-active idenfication of performance issues:* Asserting a metric like memory allocation can help to identify future performance problems before they actual materialize; while the additional allocation rate may make no difference with the system's load as of today, it may negatively impact latency and throughput as the system reaches its limits with increased load; being able to identify the increased allocation rate early on allows for a more efficient handling of the situation while working on the code, compared to when finding out about such regression only later on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Pro-active identification of performance issues:* Asserting a metric like memory allocation can help to identify future performance problems before they actual materialize; while the additional allocation rate may make no difference with the system's load as of today, it may negatively impact latency and throughput as the system reaches its limits with increased load; being able to identify the increased allocation rate early on allows for a more efficient handling of the situation while working on the code, compared to when finding out about such regression only later on
```

Reviewer: Also might want to consider: in a complete production system there might be more components being integrated then the ones we have in our testbeds.

When measuring allocation rate of components individually, they might not seem problematic as it's easier to keep the allocation budget within the cheaper TLAB range, so while their individual allocation rate might not seem to have a problematic impact on throughput measurements performed on simple benchmarks, an excessive use of allocations could still translate in problematic bottlenecks on a more complex system as the same TLAB region is shared with other libraries.

Author: That's an interesting one; any idea how you'd identify such bottleneck? I don't think it needs discussion in this post (it's super long already), but would like to better understand and see what perhaps even can be done in JfrUnit itself towards that end.

That being said, unit tests based on performance-impacting factors can be a very useful part of the performance testing strategy for an application.
They can help to identify potential performance regressions very early in the development lifecycle,
when they can be fixed comparatively easy and cheap.
Of course they are no silver bullet;
you should consider them as _complement_ for classic performance tests running on production-like hardware, not a _replacement_.

The approach may feel a bit unfamiliar initially,
and it may take some time to learn about the different metrics which can be measured with JFR and asserted via JfrUnit,
as well as their implications on an application's performance characteristics.
But once this hurdle is passed, continuous performance regression tests can be a valuable tool in the box of every software and performance engineer.

Stay tuned for part two of this blog post, where we'll explore how to trace the SQL statements executed by an application using the JMC Agent,
which will come in very handy for instance for identifying common performance problems like N+1 SELECT statements.

> _Many thanks to Hans-Peter Grahsl for his feedback while writing this blog post!_

Reviewer: nice - but who is he? A link to him, twitter maybe?

Author: Yes, I'll add links to him, you, and other reviewers, unless you oppose to being mentioned :)
